=head1 phpipam::report

phpipam::report - Reporting module for phpIPAM

=head1 SYNOPSIS

  use phpipam::report;

=head1 INSTALLATION

These are the steps to install the module

    perl Makefile.PL
    make
    make install

=head1 DEPENDENCIES

phpipam::report have some dependencies to other modules

=head2 Required
    Carp
    Net::IP
    phpipam
    Exporter

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This module will collect statistics from the phpIPAM database and generate
a simple report with interesting information based on filters and thresholds
given to the module.

=head2 EXPORT

None by default.

=head1 METHODS

=head2 new()

Create a new phpipam::report object

=head2 getUtilization(options)

Get a summary of IP utilization within a subnet,section, or the entire phpIPAM.
Default is to return a hash with utilization for all subnets in all sections.
Options are

    subnet => CIDR          - IPv4 or IPv6 CIDR as stored in the database.
                              NOTE: phpipam::report does not do any calculations
                              on subnets, a subnet must exactly match what's in
                              the database.

    section => section      - Section name as stored in the database.
                              Section names are case sensitive.

=head2 getFree(%options)

Get the number of free IP addresses.
phpipam::report consider all unallocated addresses to be free, this means that
* Active
* Reserved
* Offline
* DHCP
are all considered to be allocated addresses and are not counted.
%options limit the scope to count for free addresses, options are

    section => string           - Section name as stored in the database.
                                  Section names are case sensitive.

    subnet => CIDR              - IPv4 or IPv6 CIDR as stored in the database.
                                  NOTE: phpipam does not do any calculations
                                  on subnets, a subnet must exactly match what's in
                                  the database.

    vrf => [name|RD]            - Name or Route-Distinguisher of the VRF to search in.
By default getFree will return all free addresses in all subnets.

    my $free = $reporter->getFree({section => "Section1", subnet => "192.168.0.0/24"});

getFree() will sort the subnets in VRF and Sections so you know what subnet you're
currently looking at.
An example structure will look something like this

    $VAR1 = {
          'GLOBAL' => {
                        'Section1' => {
                                          '192.168.0.0/24' => bless( {
                                                                           'value' => [
                                                                                        253
                                                                                      ],
                                                                           'sign' => '+'
                                                                         }, 'Math::BigInt' ),
                                      }
                      }
            }

Note that subnets that do not belong to any VRFs are automatically put in the GLOBAL vrf.
Currently the number of free addresses are stored as a blessed Math::BigInt to be able to handle
IPv6 subnets, as those numbers tend to be quite large...
Just printing the number will be fine though

    print "Free addresses: ". $free->{'GLOBAL'}->{'Section1'}->{'192.168.0.0/24'}."\n"

=head2 getActive($section, $subnet)

Get the number of IP addresses that are marked as being 'Active' in $subnet.

    $reporter->getActive("servers", "10.0.0.0/8");
=cut
sub getActive {
    my $self = shift;

    return undef;
}

=head2 getReserved($section, $subnet)

Get the number of IP addresses that are marked as being 'Reserved' in $subnet.

    $reporter->getReserved("servers", "10.0.0.0/8");
=cut
sub getReserved {
    my $self = shift;

    return undef;
}

=head2 getOffline($section $subnet)

Get the number of IP addresses that are marked as being 'Offline' in $subnet.

    $reporter->getOffline("servers", "10.0.0.0/8");
=cut
sub getOffline {
    my $self = shift;

    return undef;
}

=head2 getDHCP($section, $subnet)

Get the number of IP addresses that are marked as being 'DHCP' in $subnet.

    $reporter->getDHCP("servers", "10.0.0.0/8");
=cut
sub getDHCP {
    my $self = shift;

    return undef;
}

=head2 getNoData(%opts)

Get all IP addresses within a VRF, section or subnet that does not have a value for the
required data column.
This is useful if you have custom data fields that are mandatory in your phpIPAM installation.
By default returns all addresses in all VRFs, sections and subnets if no options are given.

    $reporter->getNoData({data => 'owner', section => "servers", subnet => "10.0.0.0/8"});

%opts limit the scope for which addresses are searched, options are

    section => string           - Section name as stored in the database.
                                  Section names are case sensitive.

    subnet => CIDR              - IPv4 or IPv6 CIDR as stored in the database.
                                  NOTE: phpipam does not do any calculations
                                  on subnets, a subnet must exactly match what's in
                                  the database.

    vrf => [name|RD]            - Name or Route-Distinguisher of the VRF to search in.

    data => name                - A database column name in the ipaddresses table.
                                  This can be any column, native or custom.

By default getNoData will return all addresses in all subnets that does not
have any a value set for the required data column.

    my $addresses = $reporter->getNoData({data => 'dns_name'});

getNoData() will sort the subnets in VRF and Sections so you know what subnet you're
currently looking at.
An example structure will look something like this

    $VAR1 = {
          'TestVRF' => {
                         'SectionA' => {
                                      '192.168.0.0/24' => [
                                                            '192.168.0.1'
                                                          ]
                                    }
                       },
          'GLOBAL' => {
                        'SectionB' => {
                                          '172.20.1.0/24' => [
                                                               '172.20.1.10',
                                                               '172.20.1.11'
                                                             ],
                                        }
                      }
            };

Note that subnets that do not belong to any VRFs are automatically put in the GLOBAL vrf.

=head2 getNoDNS(%opts)

This is just a wrapper method to getNoData() for easier access.
Actually, getNoDNS() calls getNoData() like this

    return $self->getNoData({data => 'dns_name', %opts});

All options and return values are exactly the same as to getNoData().

=head1 SEE ALSO

Perl module phpipam.

=head1 AUTHOR

Diddi Oscarsson, E<lt>diddi@cyberbacon.netE<gt>

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE

Copyright (C) 2013 by Diddi Oscarsson

The MIT License (MIT)
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a copy of
this software and associated documentation files (the "Software"), to deal in
the Software without restriction, including without limitation the rights to
use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of
the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so,
subject to the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included in all
copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS
FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR
COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER
IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN
CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

